README.md, before:

# Waveshare E-Paper Node.js Driver

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/waveshare-epaper.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/waveshare-epaper)

A modular Node.js driver for Waveshare E-Paper displays that supports multiple display models with different resolutions and color modes.

## Features

- **Modular architecture**: Easy to extend with new display models
- **Multiple display support**: Currently supports 8+ display models with more easily added
- **Color mode support**: Monochrome, grayscale and color modes where supported by hardware
- **Common API**: Unified interface across all display models
- **Hardware abstraction**: Base class handles common SPI/GPIO operations
- **PNG image loading**: Built-in support for loading and displaying PNG images

## Supported Displays

Not all devices have been tested in the field. Please create a GitHub issue if you have confirmed one of the untested platforms working.

| Model     | Resolution  | Color Modes       | Description                        | Status            |
|-----------|-------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------|
| 2in13     | 122 × 250   | Monochrome        | 2.13" black/white                  | Untested          |
| 2in7      | 176 × 264   | Mono, 4-grayscale | 2.7" with grayscale support        | Untested          |
| 2in7b     | 176 × 264   | 3-color           | 2.7" black/white/red or yellow     | Untested          |
| 7in5      | 640 × 384   | Monochrome        | 7.5" black/white                   | Confirmed working |
| 7in3f     | 800 × 480   | 7-color           | 7.3" full color (7 colors)         | Untested          |
| 13in3k    | 960 × 680   | Mono, 4-grayscale | 13.3" with grayscale support       | Confirmed working |
| 13in3b    | 960 × 680   | 3-color           | 13.3" black/white/red or yellow    | Untested          |
| 13in3gray | 1600 × 1200 | 16-grayscale      | 13.3" 16-level grayscale (IT8951)  | Untested          |

## Installation

```bash
npm install waveshare-epaper
```

## Quick Start

```javascript
const { createDisplay } = require('waveshare-epaper');

async function example() {
    // Create display instance (13.3" 4-grayscale)
    const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', '4gray', {
        rstPin: 17,
        dcPin: 25,
        busyPin: 24,
        pwrPin: 18
    });

    // Initialize and use
    await epd.init();
    await epd.clear();

    // Draw with different gray levels (0=black, 1=dark gray, 2=light gray, 3=white)
    epd.drawRect(10, 10, 100, 50, 0, true);   // Black filled rectangle
    epd.drawRect(120, 10, 100, 50, 1, true);  // Dark gray rectangle
    epd.drawRect(230, 10, 100, 50, 2, true);  // Light gray rectangle
    epd.drawLine(10, 80, 330, 80, 0);         // Black line

    // Update display
    await epd.display();
    await epd.sleep();
}

// 16-grayscale example (IT8951 controller)
async function grayscaleExample() {
    const epd = createDisplay('13in3gray', '16gray', {
        rstPin: 17,
        dcPin: 25,
        busyPin: 24,
        pwrPin: 18,
        vcom: -2.30  // Adjust according to your display
    });

    await epd.init();
    await epd.clear();

    // Draw with 16 different gray levels (0=black, 15=white)
    const cellWidth = 100;
    for (let i = 0; i < 16; i++) {
        const x = (i % 8) * cellWidth;
        const y = Math.floor(i / 8) * 60;
        epd.drawRect(x, y, cellWidth - 2, 58, i, true);
    }

    // Display with high quality GC16 mode
    await epd.display('GC16');
    await epd.sleep();
}

// Canvas example (requires: npm install canvas)
async function canvasExample() {
    const { createCanvas } = require('canvas');
    const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', '4gray', {
        rstPin: 17, dcPin: 25, busyPin: 24, pwrPin: 18
    });

    await epd.init();

    // Create a simple canvas
    const canvas = createCanvas(400, 200);
    const ctx = canvas.getContext('2d');

    // White background
    ctx.fillStyle = 'white';
    ctx.fillRect(0, 0, canvas.width, canvas.height);

    // Draw text and shapes
    ctx.fillStyle = 'black';
    ctx.font = '36px Arial';
    ctx.fillText('Canvas Demo', 50, 100);

    ctx.strokeStyle = 'gray';
    ctx.lineWidth = 2;
    ctx.strokeRect(10, 10, 380, 180);

    // Draw to display
    await epd.drawCanvas(canvas, 100, 100);
    await epd.display();
    await epd.sleep();
}

example().catch(console.error);
// grayscaleExample().catch(console.error);
```

## API Reference

### Factory Functions

#### `createDisplay(model, colorMode, options)`
Creates a display instance for the specified model.

- `model` (string): Display model ('2in13', '2in7', '2in7b', '7in5', '7in3f', '13in3k', '13in3b', '13in3gray')
- `colorMode` (string): Color mode ('mono', '4gray', '16gray', '3color', '7color') - must be supported by the display
- `options` (object): Configuration options

**Options:**
- `rstPin` (number): Reset GPIO pin (default: 17)
- `dcPin` (number): Data/Command GPIO pin (default: 25)
- `busyPin` (number): Busy GPIO pin (default: 24)
- `csPin` (number): Chip Select GPIO pin (default: 22)
- `pwrPin` (number): Power control GPIO pin (default: 18)
- `gpioChip` (string): GPIO chip name (default: 'gpiochip0')
- `busNumber` (number): SPI bus number (default: 0)
- `deviceNumber` (number): SPI device number (default: 0)
- `maxSpeedHz` (number): SPI max speed (default: 4000000)
- `accentColor` (string): For 3-color displays, specify 'red' or 'yellow' accent color
- `vcom` (number): VCOM voltage for IT8951 displays (default: -2.30)

#### `getSupportedModels()`
Returns array of supported models with their specifications.

### Display Methods

#### Basic Operations
- `await epd.init()` - Initialize the display
- `await epd.clear()` - Clear display to background color
- `await epd.display()` - Update the display with current buffer
- `await epd.sleep()` - Put display into low power mode
- `await epd.cleanup()` - Clean up resources

#### Power Control
- `await epd.powerOn()` - Turn on display power (automatically called during init)
- `await epd.powerOff()` - Turn off display power (automatically called during cleanup)

#### Drawing Functions
- `epd.setPixel(x, y, color)` - Set individual pixel
- `epd.drawLine(x0, y0, x1, y1, color)` - Draw line
- `epd.drawRect(x, y, width, height, color, filled)` - Draw rectangle
- `await epd.drawPNG(filePath, x, y)` - Load and draw PNG image
- `await epd.drawCanvas(canvas, x, y)` - Draw HTML5 Canvas object

#### Enhanced Drawing (Color Displays)
**7-color displays:**
- `epd.setPixelColor(x, y, colorName)` - Set pixel using color name
- `epd.drawColorLine(x0, y0, x1, y1, colorName)` - Draw colored line
- `epd.drawColorRect(x, y, w, h, colorName, filled)` - Draw colored rectangle
- `await epd.show7Block()` - Display all 7 colors in blocks

**3-color displays:**
- `epd.drawBlackRect(x, y, w, h, filled)` - Draw black rectangle
- `epd.drawRedRect(x, y, w, h, filled)` - Draw accent color rectangle
- `await epd.show3ColorTest()` - Display 3-color test pattern

#### Color Values
- **Monochrome mode**: `0` = black, `1` = white
- **4-grayscale mode**: `0` = black, `1` = dark gray, `2` = light gray, `3` = white
- **16-grayscale mode**: `0` = black, `1-14` = varying gray levels, `15` = white
- **3-color mode**: `0` = black, `1` = white, `2` = accent color (red or yellow, configurable)
- **7-color mode**: `0` = black, `1` = white, `2` = green, `3` = blue, `4` = red, `5` = yellow, `6` = orange

#### Color Names (7-color displays)
For 7-color displays, you can use color names:
```javascript
epd.setPixelColor(x, y, 'RED');
epd.drawColorRect(10, 10, 100, 50, 'BLUE', true);
epd.drawColorLine(0, 0, 100, 100, 'GREEN');
```
Available colors: `BLACK`, `WHITE`, `RED`, `GREEN`, `BLUE`, `YELLOW`, `ORANGE`

## Architecture

### File Structure
```
├── index.js              # Main entry point and factory functions
├── EPDBase.js             # Base class with common functionality
├── displays/
│   ├── index.js           # Display module exports
│   ├── EPD2in13.js        # 2.13" monochrome display driver
│   ├── EPD2in7.js         # 2.7" mono/4-grayscale display driver
│   ├── EPD2in7b.js        # 2.7" 3-color display driver
│   ├── EPD7in5.js         # 7.5" monochrome display driver
│   ├── EPD7in3f.js        # 7.3" 7-color display driver
│   ├── EPD13in3k.js       # 13.3" mono/4-grayscale display driver
│   ├── EPD13in3b.js       # 13.3" 3-color display driver
│   └── EPD13in3Gray.js    # 13.3" 16-grayscale display driver (IT8951)
├── examples/              # Usage examples for each feature
└── README.md              # This file
```

### Extending with New Displays

To add support for a new display model:

1. Create a new file in `displays/` (e.g., `EPDNewModel.js`)
2. Extend `EPDBase` class:
   ```javascript
   const EPDBase = require('../EPDBase');

   class EPDNewModel extends EPDBase {
       constructor(options = {}) {
           super(options);
           this.width = 200;    // Set display width
           this.height = 200;   // Set display height
           this.colorMode = options.colorMode || 'mono';
           this.bitsPerPixel = this.colorMode === '4gray' ? 2 : 1;
           this.initializeBuffer();
       }

       async initDisplay() {
           // Implement display-specific initialization
       }

       async displayImage() {
           // Implement display-specific image update
       }
   }
   ```

3. Add to `displays/index.js` exports
4. Add case to `createDisplay()` function

## Hardware Requirements

### System Requirements
- Raspberry Pi with SPI enabled
- `gpiod` tools installed (`apt install gpiod`)
- Node.js 14+ (recommended: Node.js 18+)

### Raspberry Pi Model Compatibility

| Model            | GPIO Chip       | Pin Layout        | SPI Interface    | Initialization Notes             |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------------|------------------|----------------------------------|
| Pi 1 Model A/B   | `gpiochip0`     | 26-pin (original) | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Limited pins, use adapted wiring |
| Pi 1 Model A+/B+ | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| Pi 2 Model B     | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| Pi 3 Model A+/B+ | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| Pi 4 Model B     | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| **Pi 5**         | **`gpiochip4`** | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | **Requires gpioChip option**     |

#### Raspberry Pi 5 Configuration
**Critical**: Pi 5 uses `gpiochip4` instead of `gpiochip0`. You **must** specify this in your configuration or initialization will fail:

```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono', {
    rstPin: 17,
    dcPin: 25,
    busyPin: 24,
    pwrPin: 18,
    gpioChip: 'gpiochip4'  // Required for Pi 5
});
```

#### Legacy Pi Models (26-pin)
Original Pi 1 Model A/B have only 26 GPIO pins. Use this pin mapping:
- RST: GPIO 17 ✓ (available)
- DC: GPIO 25 ✓ (available)
- CS: GPIO 22 ✓ (available)
- BUSY: GPIO 24 ✓ (available)
- PWR: GPIO 18 ✓ (available)

### GPIO Pin Connections
The following GPIO pins are required for proper operation:

| Function | Default Pin | Description                                                   |
|----------|-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| RST      | GPIO 17     | Reset signal (output)                                         |
| DC       | GPIO 25     | Data/Command signal (output)                                  |
| CS       | GPIO 22     | SPI Chip Select (output)                                      |
| BUSY     | GPIO 24     | Busy status signal (input)                                    |
| **PWR**  | **GPIO 18** | **Power control (output) - Critical for cold boot operation** |

**Important**: The power pin (PWR) is **essential for reliable operation**, especially when cold-booting the Raspberry Pi. Many Waveshare e-paper displays require explicit power control to function properly. Without this pin, the display may:
- Not respond to commands after a cold boot
- Work only after running other display programs first
- Show inconsistent initialization behavior

### SPI Configuration
The driver uses SPI interface with these default settings:
- SPI Bus: `/dev/spidev0.0` (bus 0, device 0)
- Speed: 4 MHz (configurable)
- Mode: SPI Mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0)

### Enable SPI on Raspberry Pi
```bash
sudo raspi-config
# Navigate to: Interfacing Options → SPI → Enable
# Or add to /boot/config.txt:
echo "dtparam=spi=on" | sudo tee -a /boot/config.txt
sudo reboot
```

## Troubleshooting

### Display Not Working After Cold Boot

**Symptoms**: Display appears to initialize (no errors) but screen doesn't update, or works only after running manufacturer's example programs.

**Cause**: Missing power pin configuration. Many Waveshare displays have internal power management that requires explicit control.

**Solution**: Always specify the power pin in your configuration:

```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono', {
    rstPin: 17,
    dcPin: 25,
    busyPin: 24,
    pwrPin: 18
});
```

### Common GPIO Issues

**Permission errors**: Make sure you're running with appropriate permissions or add your user to the `gpio` group:
```bash
sudo usermod -a -G gpio $USER
# Then log out and back in
```

**GPIO already in use**: If you see "Device or resource busy" errors, check what's using the GPIO pins:
```bash
# Check what's using GPIO pins
sudo lsof /dev/gpiomem
# Or check specific pins
gpioinfo | grep -E "(17|18|24|25)"
```

### Auto-Detection and Troubleshooting

#### Checking Your GPIO Chip
If you're unsure which GPIO chip your Pi uses, run:
```bash
gpioinfo | head -n 1
```

For Pi 5, you'll see: `gpiochip4 - 54 lines`
For older Pi models: `gpiochip0 - 54 lines` (or similar)

#### Environment Variable (Alternative)
You can also set the GPIO chip via environment variable:
```bash
export GPIO_CHIP=gpiochip4  # For Pi 5
node your-epd-program.js
```

Then check for this variable in your code:
```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono', {
    gpioChip: process.env.GPIO_CHIP || 'gpiochip0'
});
```

## Examples

See the [examples/](examples/) directory for working examples of each feature. Each example demonstrates a specific capability and can be copied directly into your projects.

### Usage Examples

#### 7-Color Display Example
```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('7in3f', '7color');
await epd.init();

// Show all 7 colors in blocks
await epd.show7Block();

// Draw using color names
epd.drawColorRect(50, 50, 100, 80, 'RED', true);
epd.drawColorLine(0, 100, 800, 100, 'BLUE');
epd.setPixelColor(10, 10, 'GREEN');

await epd.display();
```

#### 3-Color Display Example
```javascript
// Black/White/Red display
const epd = createDisplay('13in3b', 'red');
// Or Black/White/Yellow display
const epd = createDisplay('13in3b', 'yellow');

await epd.init();

// Draw in different colors
epd.drawBlackRect(50, 50, 200, 100, true);  // Black rectangle
epd.drawRedRect(300, 50, 200, 100, true);   // Accent color rectangle
// White is the background color

// Show test pattern
await epd.show3ColorTest();
```

#### Canvas Support
The `drawCanvas()` method allows rendering HTML5 Canvas objects directly to the display. This enables dynamic text rendering with TrueType fonts, graphics drawing, and complex layouts:

```javascript
const { createCanvas, registerFont } = require('canvas');

// Register a TrueType font
registerFont('/usr/share/fonts/truetype/dejavu/DejaVuSans.ttf', { family: 'MyFont' });

// Create and configure canvas
const canvas = createCanvas(800, 400);
const ctx = canvas.getContext('2d');

// White background
ctx.fillStyle = 'white';
ctx.fillRect(0, 0, canvas.width, canvas.height);

// Draw text with custom font
ctx.fillStyle = 'black';
ctx.font = '48px MyFont';
ctx.textAlign = 'center';
ctx.fillText('Hello E-Paper!', canvas.width / 2, canvas.height / 2);

// Draw graphics
ctx.strokeStyle = 'black';
ctx.lineWidth = 3;
ctx.strokeRect(10, 10, canvas.width - 20, canvas.height - 20);

// Render to display
await epd.drawCanvas(canvas, 0, 0);
```

**Canvas Features:**
- TrueType font rendering with `canvas` package
- Text, shapes, gradients, and complex graphics
- Automatic color conversion for all display modes
- Transparency support (transparent pixels become background color)
- Full HTML5 Canvas API compatibility

**Requirements:**
Install the `canvas` package for Canvas support:
```bash
npm install canvas
```

See `canvas-example.js` for a complete working example.

#### Advanced Color Detection
The driver automatically converts PNG images to the appropriate color format:
```javascript
// 7-color display will convert RGB to nearest of 7 colors
await epd.drawPNG('colorful-image.png', 0, 0);

// 3-color display will detect red/yellow regions and convert others to black/white
await epd.drawPNG('mixed-color-image.png', 0, 0);
```

## Migration from Original Code

The original display classes are still available for backward compatibility:

```javascript
const { EPD13in3k } = require('waveshare-epaper');
const epd = new EPD13in3k();
```

However, using the new factory function is recommended:

```javascript
const { createDisplay } = require('waveshare-epaper');
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono');
```

## Publishing

To publish a new version to npm:

```bash
npm version patch  # or minor/major
npm publish
```

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Based on Waveshare example code.

Commit message:

README.md: add gpio group membership suggestion instead of using sudo everywhere. bump version

README.md, after:

# Waveshare E-Paper Node.js Driver

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/waveshare-epaper.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/waveshare-epaper)

A modular Node.js driver for Waveshare E-Paper displays that supports multiple display models with different resolutions and color modes.

## Features

- **Modular architecture**: Easy to extend with new display models
- **Multiple display support**: Currently supports 8+ display models with more easily added
- **Color mode support**: Monochrome, grayscale and color modes where supported by hardware
- **Common API**: Unified interface across all display models
- **Hardware abstraction**: Base class handles common SPI/GPIO operations
- **PNG image loading**: Built-in support for loading and displaying PNG images

## Supported Displays

Not all devices have been tested in the field. Please create a GitHub issue if you have confirmed one of the untested platforms working.

| Model     | Resolution  | Color Modes       | Description                        | Status            |
|-----------|-------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------|
| 2in13     | 122 × 250   | Monochrome        | 2.13" black/white                  | Untested          |
| 2in7      | 176 × 264   | Mono, 4-grayscale | 2.7" with grayscale support        | Untested          |
| 2in7b     | 176 × 264   | 3-color           | 2.7" black/white/red or yellow     | Untested          |
| 7in5      | 640 × 384   | Monochrome        | 7.5" black/white                   | Confirmed working |
| 7in3f     | 800 × 480   | 7-color           | 7.3" full color (7 colors)         | Untested          |
| 13in3k    | 960 × 680   | Mono, 4-grayscale | 13.3" with grayscale support       | Confirmed working |
| 13in3b    | 960 × 680   | 3-color           | 13.3" black/white/red or yellow    | Untested          |
| 13in3gray | 1600 × 1200 | 16-grayscale      | 13.3" 16-level grayscale (IT8951)  | Untested          |

## Installation

```bash
npm install waveshare-epaper
```

### GPIO Permissions (Recommended)
For security, add your user to the `gpio` group instead of running as root:

```bash
# Add current user to gpio group
sudo usermod -a -G gpio $USER

# Log out and back in, then verify group membership
groups
```

After logging back in, you can run GPIO programs without `sudo`. If you still encounter permission issues, `sudo` can be used as a fallback, though it's less secure.

## Quick Start

```javascript
const { createDisplay } = require('waveshare-epaper');

async function example() {
    // Create display instance (13.3" 4-grayscale)
    const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', '4gray', {
        rstPin: 17,
        dcPin: 25,
        busyPin: 24,
        pwrPin: 18
    });

    // Initialize and use
    await epd.init();
    await epd.clear();

    // Draw with different gray levels (0=black, 1=dark gray, 2=light gray, 3=white)
    epd.drawRect(10, 10, 100, 50, 0, true);   // Black filled rectangle
    epd.drawRect(120, 10, 100, 50, 1, true);  // Dark gray rectangle
    epd.drawRect(230, 10, 100, 50, 2, true);  // Light gray rectangle
    epd.drawLine(10, 80, 330, 80, 0);         // Black line

    // Update display
    await epd.display();
    await epd.sleep();
}

// 16-grayscale example (IT8951 controller)
async function grayscaleExample() {
    const epd = createDisplay('13in3gray', '16gray', {
        rstPin: 17,
        dcPin: 25,
        busyPin: 24,
        pwrPin: 18,
        vcom: -2.30  // Adjust according to your display
    });

    await epd.init();
    await epd.clear();

    // Draw with 16 different gray levels (0=black, 15=white)
    const cellWidth = 100;
    for (let i = 0; i < 16; i++) {
        const x = (i % 8) * cellWidth;
        const y = Math.floor(i / 8) * 60;
        epd.drawRect(x, y, cellWidth - 2, 58, i, true);
    }

    // Display with high quality GC16 mode
    await epd.display('GC16');
    await epd.sleep();
}

// Canvas example (requires: npm install canvas)
async function canvasExample() {
    const { createCanvas } = require('canvas');
    const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', '4gray', {
        rstPin: 17, dcPin: 25, busyPin: 24, pwrPin: 18
    });

    await epd.init();

    // Create a simple canvas
    const canvas = createCanvas(400, 200);
    const ctx = canvas.getContext('2d');

    // White background
    ctx.fillStyle = 'white';
    ctx.fillRect(0, 0, canvas.width, canvas.height);

    // Draw text and shapes
    ctx.fillStyle = 'black';
    ctx.font = '36px Arial';
    ctx.fillText('Canvas Demo', 50, 100);

    ctx.strokeStyle = 'gray';
    ctx.lineWidth = 2;
    ctx.strokeRect(10, 10, 380, 180);

    // Draw to display
    await epd.drawCanvas(canvas, 100, 100);
    await epd.display();
    await epd.sleep();
}

example().catch(console.error);
// grayscaleExample().catch(console.error);
```

## API Reference

### Factory Functions

#### `createDisplay(model, colorMode, options)`
Creates a display instance for the specified model.

- `model` (string): Display model ('2in13', '2in7', '2in7b', '7in5', '7in3f', '13in3k', '13in3b', '13in3gray')
- `colorMode` (string): Color mode ('mono', '4gray', '16gray', '3color', '7color') - must be supported by the display
- `options` (object): Configuration options

**Options:**
- `rstPin` (number): Reset GPIO pin (default: 17)
- `dcPin` (number): Data/Command GPIO pin (default: 25)
- `busyPin` (number): Busy GPIO pin (default: 24)
- `csPin` (number): Chip Select GPIO pin (default: 22)
- `pwrPin` (number): Power control GPIO pin (default: 18)
- `gpioChip` (string): GPIO chip name (default: 'gpiochip0')
- `busNumber` (number): SPI bus number (default: 0)
- `deviceNumber` (number): SPI device number (default: 0)
- `maxSpeedHz` (number): SPI max speed (default: 4000000)
- `accentColor` (string): For 3-color displays, specify 'red' or 'yellow' accent color
- `vcom` (number): VCOM voltage for IT8951 displays (default: -2.30)

#### `getSupportedModels()`
Returns array of supported models with their specifications.

### Display Methods

#### Basic Operations
- `await epd.init()` - Initialize the display
- `await epd.clear()` - Clear display to background color
- `await epd.display()` - Update the display with current buffer
- `await epd.sleep()` - Put display into low power mode
- `await epd.cleanup()` - Clean up resources

#### Power Control
- `await epd.powerOn()` - Turn on display power (automatically called during init)
- `await epd.powerOff()` - Turn off display power (automatically called during cleanup)

#### Drawing Functions
- `epd.setPixel(x, y, color)` - Set individual pixel
- `epd.drawLine(x0, y0, x1, y1, color)` - Draw line
- `epd.drawRect(x, y, width, height, color, filled)` - Draw rectangle
- `await epd.drawPNG(filePath, x, y)` - Load and draw PNG image
- `await epd.drawCanvas(canvas, x, y)` - Draw HTML5 Canvas object

#### Enhanced Drawing (Color Displays)
**7-color displays:**
- `epd.setPixelColor(x, y, colorName)` - Set pixel using color name
- `epd.drawColorLine(x0, y0, x1, y1, colorName)` - Draw colored line
- `epd.drawColorRect(x, y, w, h, colorName, filled)` - Draw colored rectangle
- `await epd.show7Block()` - Display all 7 colors in blocks

**3-color displays:**
- `epd.drawBlackRect(x, y, w, h, filled)` - Draw black rectangle
- `epd.drawRedRect(x, y, w, h, filled)` - Draw accent color rectangle
- `await epd.show3ColorTest()` - Display 3-color test pattern

#### Color Values
- **Monochrome mode**: `0` = black, `1` = white
- **4-grayscale mode**: `0` = black, `1` = dark gray, `2` = light gray, `3` = white
- **16-grayscale mode**: `0` = black, `1-14` = varying gray levels, `15` = white
- **3-color mode**: `0` = black, `1` = white, `2` = accent color (red or yellow, configurable)
- **7-color mode**: `0` = black, `1` = white, `2` = green, `3` = blue, `4` = red, `5` = yellow, `6` = orange

#### Color Names (7-color displays)
For 7-color displays, you can use color names:
```javascript
epd.setPixelColor(x, y, 'RED');
epd.drawColorRect(10, 10, 100, 50, 'BLUE', true);
epd.drawColorLine(0, 0, 100, 100, 'GREEN');
```
Available colors: `BLACK`, `WHITE`, `RED`, `GREEN`, `BLUE`, `YELLOW`, `ORANGE`

## Architecture

### File Structure
```
├── index.js              # Main entry point and factory functions
├── EPDBase.js             # Base class with common functionality
├── displays/
│   ├── index.js           # Display module exports
│   ├── EPD2in13.js        # 2.13" monochrome display driver
│   ├── EPD2in7.js         # 2.7" mono/4-grayscale display driver
│   ├── EPD2in7b.js        # 2.7" 3-color display driver
│   ├── EPD7in5.js         # 7.5" monochrome display driver
│   ├── EPD7in3f.js        # 7.3" 7-color display driver
│   ├── EPD13in3k.js       # 13.3" mono/4-grayscale display driver
│   ├── EPD13in3b.js       # 13.3" 3-color display driver
│   └── EPD13in3Gray.js    # 13.3" 16-grayscale display driver (IT8951)
├── examples/              # Usage examples for each feature
└── README.md              # This file
```

### Extending with New Displays

To add support for a new display model:

1. Create a new file in `displays/` (e.g., `EPDNewModel.js`)
2. Extend `EPDBase` class:
   ```javascript
   const EPDBase = require('../EPDBase');

   class EPDNewModel extends EPDBase {
       constructor(options = {}) {
           super(options);
           this.width = 200;    // Set display width
           this.height = 200;   // Set display height
           this.colorMode = options.colorMode || 'mono';
           this.bitsPerPixel = this.colorMode === '4gray' ? 2 : 1;
           this.initializeBuffer();
       }

       async initDisplay() {
           // Implement display-specific initialization
       }

       async displayImage() {
           // Implement display-specific image update
       }
   }
   ```

3. Add to `displays/index.js` exports
4. Add case to `createDisplay()` function

## Hardware Requirements

### System Requirements
- Raspberry Pi with SPI enabled
- `gpiod` tools installed (`apt install gpiod`)
- Node.js 14+ (recommended: Node.js 18+)

### Raspberry Pi Model Compatibility

| Model            | GPIO Chip       | Pin Layout        | SPI Interface    | Initialization Notes             |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------------|------------------|----------------------------------|
| Pi 1 Model A/B   | `gpiochip0`     | 26-pin (original) | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Limited pins, use adapted wiring |
| Pi 1 Model A+/B+ | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| Pi 2 Model B     | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| Pi 3 Model A+/B+ | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| Pi 4 Model B     | `gpiochip0`     | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | Full compatibility               |
| **Pi 5**         | **`gpiochip4`** | 40-pin            | `/dev/spidev0.0` | **Requires gpioChip option**     |

#### Raspberry Pi 5 Configuration
**Critical**: Pi 5 uses `gpiochip4` instead of `gpiochip0`. You **must** specify this in your configuration or initialization will fail:

```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono', {
    rstPin: 17,
    dcPin: 25,
    busyPin: 24,
    pwrPin: 18,
    gpioChip: 'gpiochip4'  // Required for Pi 5
});
```

#### Legacy Pi Models (26-pin)
Original Pi 1 Model A/B have only 26 GPIO pins. Use this pin mapping:
- RST: GPIO 17 ✓ (available)
- DC: GPIO 25 ✓ (available)
- CS: GPIO 22 ✓ (available)
- BUSY: GPIO 24 ✓ (available)
- PWR: GPIO 18 ✓ (available)

### GPIO Pin Connections
The following GPIO pins are required for proper operation:

| Function | Default Pin | Description                                                   |
|----------|-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| RST      | GPIO 17     | Reset signal (output)                                         |
| DC       | GPIO 25     | Data/Command signal (output)                                  |
| CS       | GPIO 22     | SPI Chip Select (output)                                      |
| BUSY     | GPIO 24     | Busy status signal (input)                                    |
| **PWR**  | **GPIO 18** | **Power control (output) - Critical for cold boot operation** |

**Important**: The power pin (PWR) is **essential for reliable operation**, especially when cold-booting the Raspberry Pi. Many Waveshare e-paper displays require explicit power control to function properly. Without this pin, the display may:
- Not respond to commands after a cold boot
- Work only after running other display programs first
- Show inconsistent initialization behavior

### SPI Configuration
The driver uses SPI interface with these default settings:
- SPI Bus: `/dev/spidev0.0` (bus 0, device 0)
- Speed: 4 MHz (configurable)
- Mode: SPI Mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0)

### Enable SPI on Raspberry Pi
```bash
sudo raspi-config
# Navigate to: Interfacing Options → SPI → Enable
# Or add to /boot/config.txt:
echo "dtparam=spi=on" | sudo tee -a /boot/config.txt
sudo reboot
```

## Troubleshooting

### Display Not Working After Cold Boot

**Symptoms**: Display appears to initialize (no errors) but screen doesn't update, or works only after running manufacturer's example programs.

**Cause**: Missing power pin configuration. Many Waveshare displays have internal power management that requires explicit control.

**Solution**: Always specify the power pin in your configuration:

```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono', {
    rstPin: 17,
    dcPin: 25,
    busyPin: 24,
    pwrPin: 18
});
```

### Common GPIO Issues

**Permission errors**: Make sure you're running with appropriate permissions or add your user to the `gpio` group:
```bash
sudo usermod -a -G gpio $USER
# Then log out and back in
```

**GPIO already in use**: If you see "Device or resource busy" errors, check what's using the GPIO pins:
```bash
# Check what's using GPIO pins
sudo lsof /dev/gpiomem
# Or check specific pins
gpioinfo | grep -E "(17|18|24|25)"
```

### Auto-Detection and Troubleshooting

#### Checking Your GPIO Chip
If you're unsure which GPIO chip your Pi uses, run:
```bash
gpioinfo | head -n 1
```

For Pi 5, you'll see: `gpiochip4 - 54 lines`
For older Pi models: `gpiochip0 - 54 lines` (or similar)

#### Environment Variable (Alternative)
You can also set the GPIO chip via environment variable:
```bash
export GPIO_CHIP=gpiochip4  # For Pi 5
node your-epd-program.js
```

Then check for this variable in your code:
```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono', {
    gpioChip: process.env.GPIO_CHIP || 'gpiochip0'
});
```

## Examples

See the [examples/](examples/) directory for working examples of each feature. Each example demonstrates a specific capability and can be copied directly into your projects.

### Usage Examples

#### 7-Color Display Example
```javascript
const epd = createDisplay('7in3f', '7color');
await epd.init();

// Show all 7 colors in blocks
await epd.show7Block();

// Draw using color names
epd.drawColorRect(50, 50, 100, 80, 'RED', true);
epd.drawColorLine(0, 100, 800, 100, 'BLUE');
epd.setPixelColor(10, 10, 'GREEN');

await epd.display();
```

#### 3-Color Display Example
```javascript
// Black/White/Red display
const epd = createDisplay('13in3b', 'red');
// Or Black/White/Yellow display
const epd = createDisplay('13in3b', 'yellow');

await epd.init();

// Draw in different colors
epd.drawBlackRect(50, 50, 200, 100, true);  // Black rectangle
epd.drawRedRect(300, 50, 200, 100, true);   // Accent color rectangle
// White is the background color

// Show test pattern
await epd.show3ColorTest();
```

#### Canvas Support
The `drawCanvas()` method allows rendering HTML5 Canvas objects directly to the display. This enables dynamic text rendering with TrueType fonts, graphics drawing, and complex layouts:

```javascript
const { createCanvas, registerFont } = require('canvas');

// Register a TrueType font
registerFont('/usr/share/fonts/truetype/dejavu/DejaVuSans.ttf', { family: 'MyFont' });

// Create and configure canvas
const canvas = createCanvas(800, 400);
const ctx = canvas.getContext('2d');

// White background
ctx.fillStyle = 'white';
ctx.fillRect(0, 0, canvas.width, canvas.height);

// Draw text with custom font
ctx.fillStyle = 'black';
ctx.font = '48px MyFont';
ctx.textAlign = 'center';
ctx.fillText('Hello E-Paper!', canvas.width / 2, canvas.height / 2);

// Draw graphics
ctx.strokeStyle = 'black';
ctx.lineWidth = 3;
ctx.strokeRect(10, 10, canvas.width - 20, canvas.height - 20);

// Render to display
await epd.drawCanvas(canvas, 0, 0);
```

**Canvas Features:**
- TrueType font rendering with `canvas` package
- Text, shapes, gradients, and complex graphics
- Automatic color conversion for all display modes
- Transparency support (transparent pixels become background color)
- Full HTML5 Canvas API compatibility

**Requirements:**
Install the `canvas` package for Canvas support:
```bash
npm install canvas
```

See `canvas-example.js` for a complete working example.

#### Advanced Color Detection
The driver automatically converts PNG images to the appropriate color format:
```javascript
// 7-color display will convert RGB to nearest of 7 colors
await epd.drawPNG('colorful-image.png', 0, 0);

// 3-color display will detect red/yellow regions and convert others to black/white
await epd.drawPNG('mixed-color-image.png', 0, 0);
```

## Migration from Original Code

The original display classes are still available for backward compatibility:

```javascript
const { EPD13in3k } = require('waveshare-epaper');
const epd = new EPD13in3k();
```

However, using the new factory function is recommended:

```javascript
const { createDisplay } = require('waveshare-epaper');
const epd = createDisplay('13in3k', 'mono');
```

## Publishing

To publish a new version to npm:

```bash
npm version patch  # or minor/major
npm publish
```

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Based on Waveshare example code.
